Genes act in concierto with each other in specifico contexts to perform their functions. Determining how these genes influence complex traits requires a mechanistic understanding of expression regulation across different conditions. It has been shown that this insight is critical for developing new therapies. Transcriptome-wide association studies have helped uncover the role of individual genes in disease-relevant mechanisms. However, modern models of the architecture of complex traits predict that gene-gene interactions play a crucial role in disease origin and progression. Here we introduce PhenoPLIER, a computational approach that maps gene-trait associations and pharmacological perturbation data into a common latent representation for a joint analysis. This representation is base on modules of genes with similar expression patterns across the same conditions. We observe that diseases are significantl associated with gene modules expressed in relevant cell types, and our approach is accurate in predicting known drug-disease pairs and inferring mechanisms of action. Furthermore using a CRISPR screen to analyze lipid regulation, we find that functionally important players lack associations but are prioritized in trait-associated modules by PhenoPLIER. In conclusion, by incorporating, groups of co-expressed genes, PhenoPLIER can contextualize genetic associations and reveal, potential targets missed by single-gene strategies. PhenoPLIER provides a novel framework for interpreting genetic associations through the lens of gene modules.
